# stat527final

This project aims to predict divorce status based on Divorce Predictors Scale (DPS) developed by Yöntem and İlhan (2018) on the basis of Gottman couples therapy (Gottman, 2014). Gottman listed four most important reasons for divorce: Criticism, Contempt, Stonewalling and Defensiveness, along with the “failure to repair” (Gottman, 1999; Gottman and Silver, 2015). Over the course of this project, we will explore important DPS factors that are related to these four reasons.
The divorce dataset (https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Divorce+Predictors+data+set#) includes the data of 170 couples from Turkey, 84 of whom were divorced and 86 were married. The answers to the questionnaire based on DPS consists of 5 subscales (0=Never, 1=Seldom, 2=Averagely, 3=Frequently, 4=Always).
I will build prediction models using the following algorithms: Decision tree algorithm, Random Forest, Linear SVC, K-nearest neighbors for prediction models; Principal Components Analysis combined with Linear SVC. The dataset will be split into a training set (80%) and a test set (20%), and the performance of each algorithm will be evaluated using accuracy scores. Since this relatively small dataset includes only 170 data points over 54 attributes, it’s prone to high variance in performance metrics so the accuracy score for some models might vary from one run to another. So for all models, I computed the average accuracy scores over 100 runs, and repeated this process 10 times. Variable importance plots and decision trees are also used to identify important predictors of divorce.
All analysis is done using Python, and machine learning algorithms are fitted with the scikit-learn package. All 54 explanatory variables are ordinal, so no preprocessing or conversion of data types are necessary. There are also no missing values.
